>> GOOD AFTERNOON EVERYBODY.
I'M GOING TO DO A CALL TO
ORDER.
THIS IS THE SEATTLE PARK
DISTRICT BOARD ON NOVEMBER 18.
MY NAME IS DEBORAH JUAREZ AND I
AM PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD.
CLERK, CALL THE ROLE.
>> HAROLD, HERBOLD, O'BRIEN,
PACHECO, AND PRESIDENT JUAREZ.
SIX PRESENT.
>> THANK YOU.
WE WILL MOVE INTO APPROVAL OF
THE AGENDA IF THERE IS NO
OBJECTION.
THE AGENDA WILL BE A DOCTOR
AND.
THE AGENDA IS ADOPTED.
DO I SIGN THAT NOW?
NO, I SIGN THAT LATER.
SORRY ABOUT THAT.
I WAS LOOKING AT THE WRONG
ITEM.
I APOLOGIZE.
TODAY WE WILL HAVE A
PRESENTATION FROM THE
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND
RECREATION ON THE 2019 PARK
DISTRICT ACTIVITIES AND
FINANCIALS.
I BELIEVE IT IS A SEVEN-PAGE
POWERPOINT.
THIS WILL BE FOLLOWED BY A
PUBLIC HEARING TO ACCEPT
COMMENTS ON REVENUE SOURCES FOR
THE 2020 OPERATIONS BUDGET AND
A POTENTIAL TAX LEVY INCREASE
IN 2020.
THIS IS SEPARATE FROM OUR
TRADITIONAL PUBLIC COMMENT
PERIOD AT THE START OF THE
COMMITTEE.
RELATED TO GENERAL PARKS ISSUES
AND ITEMS ON THE AGENDA.
SO WITH THAT, I WILL NOW GO TO
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES.
THE MINUTES OF THE JUNE 24, 2019
SEATTLE PARK DISTRICT BOARD
MEETING HAVE BEEN REVIEWED.
IF THERE ARE NO OBJECTIONS, THE
MINUTES WILL BE SIGNED.
HEARING NO OBJECTION, THE
THERE YOU GO.
SO A FRIENDLY REMINDER, WE HAVE
AN INTERESTING AGENDA OF HOW
WE'RE GOING TO DO THIS DAY
BASED ON THE PUBLIC HEARING WE
HAVE COMING UP, SO A FRIENDLY
REMINDER, THOSE WHO SIGNED UP,
IF YOU WISH TO COMMENT
SPECIFICALLY ON REVENUE SOURCES
FOR THE 2020 OPERATIONS OR A
POTENTIAL PROPERTY TAX LEVY,
PLEASE SIGN IN FOR THE PUBLIC
HEARING, WHICH IS DIFFERENT
THAN PUBLIC COMMENT, WHICH WILL
CONVENE AT THE END OF THE
AGENDA.
HOW MANY PEOPLE DO WE HAVE
SIGNED UP JODI?
>> I ONLY HAVE PUBLIC HEARING.
>> NO ONE SIGNED UP FOR PUBLIC
COMMENT?
IT IS ON THE WRONG LIST.
>> WE HAVE ONE PERSON SIGNED
UP.
TWO FOR PUBLIC COMMENT.
OKAY.
I WILL HAVE JODI, CALL THEIR
NAMES.
>> I APOLOGIZE FOR SIGNING UP
ON THE WRONG FORM.
>> WE HAVE TWO MINUTES.
YOU KNOW HOW IT WORKS.
GO AHEAD.
>> I RECENTLY RETIRED FROM A 46
YEAR CAREER WITH SEATTLE PARKS
AND RECREATION RIGHT DIRECTED
STAFF WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF
HUNDRED OF PARKS FACILITIES
AND MANAGE THE ACQUISITION OVER
850 ACRES OF PARKLAND.
HERE TODAY BECAUSE PEOPLE OF
SEATTLE LOVE THEIR PARKS.
FIVE YEARS AGO VOTED TO APPROVE
A METROPOLITAN PARK DISTRICT TO
PROVIDE ADDITIONAL TAX DOLLARS
TO MAINTAIN AND OPERATE OUR
PARKS AND REQUIRE MORE
PARKLAND.
IN 1967 CITIZEN SUPPORTED THE
KING COUNTY TRUST BOND ISSUE
$100 MILLION FOR THE PARKS AND
REQUISITION FACILITIES.
SINCE THAT TIME THEY VOTED OR
SUPPORTED SIX INITIATIVES THAT
VARIOUSLY PROTECT THE PARKS.
NEW AQUARIUM ECKEL THE GARDENS,
EXPANSION OF THE ZOO, GOLF CARS
AND DISCOVERY PARK, NO FENCE
AROUND THE WASHINGTON PARK, AND
MOST SIGNIFICANTLY, IN 1994
INITIATIVE 42 PROTECT OUR PARKS
, BUT I PROHIBITING THE NON-
PARK USE OF PARKLAND, AND YET
THERE'S CURRENTLY A CITY
DEPARTMENTAL TASK FORCE FORMED
TO CONSIDER THE USE OF CITY-
OWNED GOLF COURSES FOR "NON-
PARK USES."
EXACTLY WHAT I 42, AND ORDINANCE
118477 WAS PASSED TO PROHIBIT.
ADDITIONALLY, PARTS OF AND
ASKED IF THEY HAVE POTENTIAL
NEEDS THAT WOULD REQUIRE REAL
ESTATE.
ARE PARKLANDS NOW JUST REAL
ESTATE?
1989 KING COUNTY OPEN SPACE
BOND ISSUE WHICH PROVIDED $50
MILLION FOR NATURAL TRAILS IN
SEATTLE WITH A 72% FAVORABLE
VOTE HAVING FAILED THE YEAR
BEFORE, ELECTED LEADERS
INCLUDED FUNDING FOR A
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT INSTEAD OF
ACQUISITION.
MOST RELEVANT TO THE ISSUE AT
HAND, TODAY, MY ISSUE OF USE OF
PARKLAND WAS THE $198 MILLION
2000 PRO PARKS LEVY WHICH
FOLLOWED A MAJOR NEIGHBORHOOD
PLANNING EFFORT WHERE FOR THE
FIRST TIME NEIGHBORHOODS CAME
TO TERMS WITH THE NEED TO
ACCOMMODATE ADDITIONAL DENSITY.
THE STRUGGLE WE HAVE TODAY.
IF MITIGATED BY THE PROVISION
OF ADDITIONAL PARKS AND OVER
SPACE, WHICH THAT LEVY THEN
FUNDED, WHY NOW WILL BE
CONSIDERED GIVING UP PARKLAND
WHILE CONTINUING TO ADD THAT
DENSITY?
I REALIZE WE HAVE THE HOUSING
CRISIS.
SEATTLE CITIZENS WILL NOT LET
THAT HAPPEN, NOR SHOULD YOU.
NEVER UNDERESTIMATE THE IMPACT
OF A POOR DECISION.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU SIR.
>> WHO WAS NEXT?
>> HARPER, THE QUEEN ANNE
COMMITTEE COUNSEL WHERE HE
SERVED AS THE CHAIR OF THE
PARKS COMMITTEE NOW FOR 18
YEARS.
I BEEN A CITIZEN ACTIVIST FOR
PARKS FOR OVER 20 YEARS.
ONE OF MY ACCOMPLISHMENTS WAS
THE PURCHASE OF SMITH COVE
PARK.
I WORKED ON THAT SINCE 1997.
WE FINALLY ACCOMPLISHED THAT.
SO I HAVE BEEN DOING THIS FOR
QUITE SOME TIME.
I AM INCREDIBLY DISTURBED THAT
THERE IS EVEN A THOUGHT IN THIS
SEATTLE CITY COUNCIL HEAD THAT
YOU ARE GOING TO SELL PARKS
PROPERTY.
IF YOU FEEL LIKE A PARK IS
UNDERPERFORMING, SUCH AS THE
GOLF COURSE, I HAVE AN IDEA.
WE HAVE A CRUSHING NEED FOR
MORE SPORTS FIELDS.
WE NEED A MOUNTAIN BIKE COURT,
WE NEED WALKING COURTS, WE NEED
AN OFF LEASH AREA THAT ACTUALLY
WORKS FOR THE 172,000 DOGS OUT
THERE AND ALL THE HUMAN BEINGS
ON THE OTHER END OF THE LEASH.
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT I'M SAYING?
WE DO NOT HAVE ENOUGH PARKS.
THE REASON I 42 AND THE
ORDINANCE THAT YOUR PAST
PREDECESSORS PAST IN ORDER TO
PROTECT PARKS WAS BECAUSE THE
CITY OF SEATTLE LOVES PARKS.
SHOULD YOU PROCEED AND TRY TO
SELL OR CHANGE THE USE OF ANY
OF OUR PARKS, I WILL GET
INVOLVED IN CREATING AN
INITIATIVE TO MAKE AN AMENDMENT
TO THE CITY CHARTER THAT WILL
PERMANENTLY PROTECT OUR PARKS
FROM SUCH FOOLISHNESS.
SO PLEASE, WE NEED OUR PARKS,
WE HAVE A LOT OF USES FOR THEM.
LET'S KEEP THEM.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
I BELIEVE THAT ENDS PUBLIC
COMMENT.
OKAY.
THANK YOU FOR PEOPLE
PARTICIPATED TODAY.
WE WILL MOVE ON TO THE ITEMS OF
BUSINESS.
>> AGENDA ITEM 1, 2019 SEATTLE
PARK DISTRICT ACTIVITIES,
FINANCIALS AND CUMULATIVE
FINANCIAL UPDATE.
>> I SEE OUR PARTICIPANTS ARE
ALREADY AT THE TABLE.
I WILL LET YOU INTRODUCE
YOURSELVES, INCLUDING YOU, AND
THEN WE WILL GO THROUGH YOUR
PRESENTATION.
>> STAFF TO COUNCILMEMBER
JUAREZ.
>> TRACI RATZLIFF, COUNSEL
CENTRAL STUFF, TRAN40, SEATTLE
PARK AND RECREATION.
>> THANK YOU BOARD MEMBERS.
I AM GOING TO BEGIN WITH GIVING
YOU AN OVERVIEW OF SOME OF HER
2019 ACTIVITIES.
JUST AS A REMINDER.
AS YOUR BOARD MEETS TWICE A
YEAR IN JUNE AND NOVEMBER, THE
LAST TIME WE WERE BEFORE YOU WE
PRESENTED OUR 2018 FINAL REPORT
OF FINANCIALS AS WELL AS OUR
ACTIVITIES.
THIS IS A YEAR TO DATE REPORT
FOR 2019 WHEN WE RETURN IN 2020
IN JUNE WE WILL THEN PROVIDE
SOME OF OUR FAMILY MEMBER
THAT'S FINE NO 2019.
THE WAY WE'RE GOING TO GO
THROUGH THE PRESENTATION IS
THROUGH HIGHLIGHTS OF THE FOUR
MAJOR CATEGORIES OUTLINED IN
THE INITIAL FINANCIAL PLAN AND
THOSE ARE THE FIX IT FIRST,
BUILDING FOR FUTURE,
MAINTAINING PARKS AND
FACILITIES, AND PROGRAMS FOR
PEOPLE.
WE WILL JUMP INTO THOSE.
THE FIRST TALKS ABOUT THE FIX
IT FIRST CATEGORY, WHICH IS
REALLY INCLUDING THE MAJOR
MAINTENANCE, ASSET MANAGEMENT
ON THE CAPITOL SIDE AND THAT
SMALL OPERATING PIECES FOR A
TREE CREW AND OPERATION
SUPPORT.
THIS IS THE BULK OF THE FUNDING
AS PART OF THE FIRST SIX YEAR
CYCLE IN THE PARK DISTRICT.
THIS IS WHERE WE WERE REALLY
TASKED WITH ADDRESSING THE
DEFERRED MAINTENANCE IN THE
CITY.
70 HIGHLIGHTS IN THE MAJOR
MAINTENANCE SIDE OF THINGS, WE
COMPLETED TO DATE IN 2019, 2020
PROJECTS, 10 OF THEM UNDER
CONSTRUCTION.
THESE PROJECTS RANGE FROM
EVERYTHING TO IRRIGATION WORK,
A PLAY AREA RENOVATION AT PUGET
BRIDGE IN WALLINGFORD, SOME
POOL RENOVATIONS SOUTHWEST AND
MEADOWBROOK.
PART OF THIS CATEGORY ALSO
INCLUDES THE REMOVAL OF
ENCROACHMENTS ON PARKS AND
úRECREATION PILOT PROPERTY, IN
2019 WE REMOVED 11 AND ALSO
BROUGHT IN 21 POINT FOR NEW
ACRES OF URBAN FOREST INTO
RESTORATION UNDER THE GREEN
SEATTLE PARTNERSHIP.
THE MAINTAINING PARKS AND
FACILITIES CATEGORY IS REALLY
ABOUT THINGS LIKE PEAT PATCHES,
OFF LEASH AREAS AND SOME
ADDITIONAL PREVENTIVE
MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS AND
ENHANCED PROGRAMS FOR CLEANING
PARKS AND COMMUNITY CENTERS.
SOME HIGHLIGHTS, AS YOU MIGHT
RECALL, IN THE PAST WE'VE
TALKED ABOUT A THIRD SHIFT WE
ADDED AS PART OF THE PARK
DISTRICT THAT ALLOWS SOME OF
POWER TRAYS TRADES AND MAKE THE
SCREWS TO GO IN A COUPLE OF
WEEKS IN THE EVENING AFTER
CLOSE TO ALLOWING US TO
MAINTAIN OPERATIONS AND ALLOWS
US TO DO SOME DEFERRED
MAINTENANCE.
SO IN 2019 WE ADDRESSED TO
THOSE NEEDS IN 15 COMMUNITY
CENTERS.
WE ALSO HAVE AN ENHANCED
CLEANING CREW ON THE PARKS AND
ENVIRONMENT SIDE THAT DID WORK
AT 61 LOCATIONS IN 2019 SO FAR.
IN TERMS OF OUR OFF LEASH
AREAS, THE FUNDING WE HAVE IN
THE PARK DISTRICT IS REALLY TO
ADDRESS SOME OF THE MAJOR NEEDS
THEY ARE FROM A FACILITY
STANDPOINT.
WE'VE GOT THREE OFF LEASH AREA
PROJECTS THAT WERE COMPLETED,
AND WE HAVE GOT PLANNING AND
DESIGN FOR FIVE OF THOSE, FIVE
ADDITIONAL SITES.
AND THEN FINALLY ON THE SLIDE
FOR P PATCHES, WE HAVE FIVE
GARDENS WITH PLANNING AND
DESIGN WORK UNDERWAY AND WILL
CONTINUE TO IMPROVE THOSE
PROPERTIES.
PROGRAMS FOR PEOPLE SUPPORTS
THE SERVICES SUCH AS OUR
COMMUNITY CENTER OPERATIONS
LIFELONG RECREATION, SPECIAL
POPULATION PROGRESS, GET
MOVING, A LOT OF OUR PROGRAMS.
SOME HIGHLIGHTS HERE, IN
COLLABORATION WITH THE OFFICE
OF ARTS AND CULTURE, WE HAVE
GRANTS PROGRAM CALLED ARTS IN
THE PARKS AND IN 2019 FUNDED 27
EVENTS, INCLUDING SEVEN
CONTEMPORARY ART INSTALLATIONS
COMPLETED IN THE PARKS.
ON A SPECIALIZED PROGRAMS THIS
INITIATIVE REALLY SUPPORTS
ADDITIONAL PROGRAMS FOR
SPECIALIZED POPULATIONS.
IN 2019 WE HAVE OFFERED 125
PROGRAMS, ROUGHLY 6600 HOURS OF
PROGRAMMING FOR OVER 2700
PARTICIPANTS.
AND THEN AND LIFELONG
RECREATION, 780 PROGRAMS WITH
ROUGHLY 9700 PARTICIPANTS
PARTICIPATING IN OVER 7000
HOURS OF PROGRAMMING FUNDED BY
THE PARK DISTRICT.
AND FINALLY, ON THE BUILDING
FOR THE FUTURE CATEGORY, WHICH
INCLUDES DEVELOPING SOME OF THE
LAND BANK SITES REQUIRED
THROUGH PREVIOUS LEVIES
INCLUDES THE MAJOR PROJECTS
CHALLENGE FUND AS WELL AS URBAN
PARKS PARTNERSHIP, OTHERWISE
NOTICED HE IS BE.
THE MAJOR PARKS CHALLENGE FUND
COMPLETED A COUPLE OF
FEASIBILITY STUDIES TO SUPPORT
WORK BY SOME OF OUR PARTNERS IN
OUR FACILITIES AND HAVE, WILL
CONTINUE TO WORK WITH THEM, TWO
OF THOSE WERE COMPLETED IN 2019.
AND OF THE LAND BANK SITES, I
AM HAPPY TO REPORT WE COMPLETED
AND OPENED OUR TWO FIRST NEW
PARKS THAT WERE DONE, ALICE
BALLPARK IN THE GREENWOOD
DISTRICT IN THE URBAN TRIANGLE
PARK IN THE SOUTH LAKE UNION
DISTRICT, BRAND NEW PARKS
BROUGHT INTO THE INVENTORY.
OF THOSE LAND BANK SITES, WE
HAVE THREE MORE UNDER
CONSTRUCTION, AND FOR OTHERS IN
DESIGN THAT WILL GO INTO
CONSTRUCTION SOON.
>> CAN I ASK YOU A QUICK
QUESTION?
JUST GOING BACK TO LAND
ACQUISITION, THE TWO PARCELS WE
ACQUIRED, THE ONE THAT I WAS
REALLY EXCITED ABOUT, THORNTON
CREEK.
WHERE ARE WE ON THAT?
WE HAVE NOT DONE DEMOLITION OR
ANYTHING YET?
>> I DON'T BELIEVE WE HAVE DONE
ANY DEMOLITION.
THIS IS IN CONJUNCTION WITH
SPU.
WE JUST SIGNED THE EMMA WAY TO
TALK ABOUT WHO IS DOING WHAT
AND ARE MOVING FORWARD.
>> THANK YOU.
>> AND THE DUWAMISH WATERPARK
IN THE SOUTH PARK AREA.
AND THE INITIATIVE ALSO FUNDS
MANY EVENTS AND ACTIVITIES, AND
PARTICULARLY THE CORE OF THIS
WAS THE DOWNTOWN PARK
ACTIVATION PROGRAM IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE SEATTLE
DOWNTOWN ASSOCIATION THAT
CONTINUED THEIR ROBUST
PROGRAMMING AT BOTH WEST LAKE
AND OCCIDENTAL AS WELL AS, WE
HAVE CONTINUE TO USE AN
EXPANDED 11 ADDITIONAL PARKS IN
THE CENTRAL AREA.
>> OKAY.
SO THIS FIRST SLIDE, THIS TABLE
SHOWS FOR THE PARK DISTRICT
OPERATING INITIATIVES, THE
CUMULATIVE VERSUS ACTION WAS
FROM 2015 TO 2018 AS WELL AS
THE 2019 BUDGET TO ACTUALS.
THROUGH SEPTEMBER.
THE PARK DISTRICT OPERATING
INITIATIVES ARE MOSTLY SPENT
EACH YEAR, AS YOU CAN SEE FROM
THE CUMULATIVE ACTUALS TOTAL.
96% WAS SPENT FROM 2015 TO
2018.
SPENDING VARIES AMONG
INITIATIVES BASED ON WHAT THE
INITIATIVE IS FUNDING.
FOR EXAMPLE, INITIATIVE THREE-
POINT TO, RECREATION
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL, OTHER
PROGRAMS FOR PEOPLE, PROVIDES
GRANTS TO COMMUNITY GROUPS TO
PROVIDE CULTURALLY RELEVANT
FREE PROGRAMS TO COMMUNITIES OF
COLOR, AND MORE SPENDING
HAPPENS IN THE FOURTH QUARTER
WHEN THE COMMUNITY GROUPS
RECEIVE THEIR REIMBURSABLE
BASED FUNDING.
OTHER FACTORS COULD INCLUDE
VACANCIES FOR POSITIONS FUNDED
THROUGH THE INITIATIVES AND
ALSO WHEN THE TIMING OF BILLS
OCCUR.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN INITIATIVE 1.6,
UTILITY BUILDINGS, WE RECEIVE
THOSE PILLS TWICE A YEAR.
SO IT IS NOT A STRAIGHTFORWARD
SPEND.
AND WE FULLY EXPECT TO SPEND
MOST OF THE 2019 OPERATING
INITIATIVES BY THE END OF THIS
YEAR.
>> THE NEXT SLIDE SHOWS OUR
PARK DISTRICT FINANCIALS FOR
THE CAPITOL SIDE.
WE, SO AGAIN, THERE ARE TWO
PARTS TO THE TABLE.
ONE SHOWS THE 2015 TO 2018 THAT
>> GO BACK TO THE PREVIOUS
SLIDE FOR A MOMENT.
THANK YOU.
ON THE RESTORING THE COMMUNITY
CENTER OPERATIONS.
I KNOW THERE WERE PLANS, AND WE
DIED IDENTIFIED SIX.
COMMUNITY CENTERS IN OUR 2015
INITIAL BUDGET.
CAN YOU GIVE ME JUST A QUICK
CAPSULE OF WHERE THOSE
COMMUNITY CENTERS ARE, THE
OPERATIONS IN TERMS ADJUST THE
SCHEDULE?
DID WE MEET THOSE COMMITMENTS?
>> YOU MIGHT BE REFERRING ON
THE CAPITOL SIDE.
THAT POT OF MONEY THERE WAS
OPERATING DOLLARS THAT WENT TO
RESTORING HOURS AND HIRING
STAFF AND SOME FUNDING FOR
IMPROVEMENTS.
>> WILL BE GET TO THAT SLIDE IN
THE FUTURE?
>> YES.
>> GREAT.
THANK YOU.
THAT WAS MY MISTAKE.
>> SO ON THE CAPITOL SIDE, THIS
TABLE SHOWS BUDGET TO ACTUALS
2015 THROUGH 2018 AS WELL AS
BUDGET TO ACTUALS FOR 2019
THROUGH SEPTEMBER.
AND CUMULATIVE SPENDING FOR THE
PARK DISTRICT ON THE CAPITOL
SIDE IS APPROXIMATELY 50%, AND
THIS COMES FROM A TOTAL
ALLOCATION OF $142 MILLION,
WHICH IS COMPRISED OF THIS $140
MILLION IN THE 2015 THROUGH
2018 COLUMN AS WELL AS 28
MILLION THAT WAS INCLUDED IN
THE 2019 ADOPTED. I SHOULD NOTE
TOO THAT THE 2019 REVISED
BUDGET COLUMN YOU SEE HERE
INCLUDES BOTH CARRY FORWARD
FROM 2015 THROUGH 2018 AS WELL
AS THE 2019 ADOPTED BUDGET.
>> CAN YOU SLOWDOWN?
SO WHAT WAS THE TOTAL AMOUNT
LAST MONTH?
I LOST TWO.
>> OKAY.
WHAT I WANTED TO SAY HERE IS
THAT OUR TOTAL BUDGET
ALLOCATION THUS FAR HAS BEEN
ABOUT $142 MILLION, AND THAT IS
COMPRISED OF $140 MILLION THAT
WE HAD IN THE 2015 TO 2018
BUDGET.
AND THEN INCLUDED IN THE 2019
REVISED BUDGET WE HAVE 28
MILLION OF 2019.
SO THE 114 PLUS THE 28 MILLION
EQUALS 142 MILLION.
TO DATE WE HAVE SPENT, AS YOU
CAN SEE FROM THE ACTUALS
COLUMNS, 49 MILLION FROM 2015
TO 2018 AS WELL AS 21 MILLION
FOR 2019.
SO THOSE TWO OUT UP TO 70
MILLION.
IF YOU TAKE 70 MILLION INTO THE
142, YOU GET ABOUT 50%.
>> OKAY.
>> SO TO HIGHLIGHT A FEW ITEMS
IN THE SLIDE.
THE FIRST ONE I THINK IS ONE OF
INTEREST, THE ONE POINT ONE
MAJOR MAINTENANCE BACKLOG AND
ASSET MANAGEMENT.
AND SPENDING HAS BEEN
ACCELERATING ANNUAL LEASE ON
THIS SINCE 2016 WITH A PLAN
SPANNED THIS YEAR OF $22
MILLION, THE HIGHEST OF ALL THE
YEARS.
WE ARE ANTICIPATING THAT A
MAJORITY OF THE REMAINING MAJOR
MAINTENANCE INITIATIVE WILL BE
MOSTLY SPENT IN 2020 WITH A
SMALL RESIDUAL REMAINING IN
2021.
LARGE PROJECTS WITH ANTICIPATED
COMPLETION IN 2020 INCLUDE
ATHLETIC FIELD RENOVATIONS,
SYNTHETIC TURF, REPLACEMENTS,
POOL RENOVATIONS AND PLAY
RENOVATIONS.
ANOTHER INITIATIVE TO HIGHLIGHT
HERE IS ONE POINT TO, COMMUNITY
CENTER REHABILITATION AND
DEVELOPMENT.
THIS IS THE ONE I THINK.
THIS WAS INITIALLY ON HOLD
WHILE WE COMPLETED THE
COMMUNITY CENTER STRATEGIC
PLAN, WHICH WAS IN SEPTEMBER
2016.
STABILIZATION WORK IS UNDERWAY
FOR FIVEOF THE SIX CENTERS,
INCLUDING HIAWATHA, JEFFERSON,
MAGNOLIA, QUEEN AND AND SOUTH
PARK.
>> THERE WAS A COMMUNITY CENTER
ASSESSMENT PLAN?
>> CORRECT.
>> QUICK QUESTION.
I KNOW THAT ALL OF THESE
COMMUNITY CENTERS ARE CONCERNED
WE ARE PUTTING BAND-AIDS ON
SOMETHING THAT REALLY NEEDS A
MUCH BIGGER INVESTMENT.
WHERE ARE WE IN THAT SENSE OF
MAKING THE MUCH BIGGER
INVESTMENT FOR ALL OF THESE
COMMUNITY CENTERS?
INCLUDING THE POSSIBILITY THAT
WE TALKED MANY TIMES ABOUT
BEING ABLE TO RESTORE THE
CENTER, BUT TO BUILD HOUSING ON
TOP OF SOME OF THEM.
>> THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
SO THE ANSWER TO THE QUESTION
IN TERMS OF THE BAND-AID
PRESSURE, YOU ARE EXACTLY
RIGHT, THAT WAS OUR CONCERN AS
WELL.
WE DID THE ORIGINAL PLAN, IT
WAS LOOKING AT HOW TO INVEST
ENOUGH SO WE CAN CONTINUE TO
OPERATE.
IT IS A LONGER-TERM QUESTION
PALMA BUT THAT WAS WHAT THE
STABILIZATION CONCEPT IS ABOUT.
IN TERMS OF LONGER-TERM
INVESTMENT, THAT IS WHAT WE ARE
IN THE MIDDLE OF RIGHT NOW.
THE STRATEGIC PLANNING PROCESS
WE JUST FINISHED THAT WE WILL
COME BACK AND SHARE, AND THEN
THAT STRATEGIC PLANNING PROCESS
WILL BE THE FOUNDATION FOR THE
CONVERSATION FOR THE NEXT 6 TO
12 YEARS OF THE PARK DISTRICT
CYCLE.
SO A BIG PART OF THAT WORK IS
LOOKING AT ALL THE COMMUNITY
CENTER PORTFOLIO TO GET A SENSE
OF WHERE WE WANT THESE
COMMUNITY CENTERS TO BE FROM A
MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDPOINT
AND WHAT, IF ANYTHING, SHOULD
BE EXPANDED.
BEYOND THE BAND-AID BUT THOSE
ARE STILL THINGS WE ARE
PLANNING IN THE FINANCIALS THAT
WE DON'T HAVE, BUT I KNOW YOU
KNOW SOME OF THESE BUILDINGS,
THAT NUMBER COULD GET VERY BIG
VERY QUICKLY.
SO WE HAVE TO BE VERY
THOUGHTFUL ABOUT HOW TO
STRATEGIZE WHERE THE CENTERS
GO.
>> THANK YOU.
>> OKAY.
ANOTHER WAY TO HIGHLIGHT IS
INITIATIVE FOR.FOR, WHICH IS
THE 14 NEW PARKS ATLANTA BANK
SITES.
IN THIS CATEGORY, IN THIS
INITIATIVE SPENDING REFLECTS
THE WERE CURRENTLY HAPPENING
WITH THE 14 LAND BANK SITES.
THE CURRENT PLAN IS THAT 10 OF
THE 14 WILL BE COMPLETE BY THE
END OF 2020 AND FOUR WILL BE IN
CONSTRUCTION.
AS WAS PREVIOUSLY MENTIONED,
THE FIRST COMPLETED PROJECT,
ALICE PAUL, OPENED IN JUNE OF
THIS YEAR AND URBAN TRIANGLE
WAS COMPLETED.
THE LAST ONE WE WANT TO
HIGHLIGHT FOR YOU IS SMITH COVE
PARK DEVELOPMENT.
THIS ONE IS CURRENTLY IN EARLY
DESIGN STAGES, WHICH IS
REFLECTED IN THE SPENDING, THE
LOW SPENDING.
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTATION IS
NEAR 100%, AND THE TEAM IS
WAITING FOR FINAL PERMITS.
THE PROJECT WILL BE BID IN THE
FALL OR WINTER, FALL OF 19 OR
WINTER 2020 AND CONSTRUCTION
WILL BEGIN IN EARLY 2020 IN THE
SECOND PHASE, THE EASTERN
PORTION, WILL BE CONSIDERED AS
PART OF THE NEXT CYCLE
FINANCIAL PLAN.
>> COUNCILMEMBER BACK SHOPPING
>> I KNOW DON HARPER LIKE ME
HAS BEEN WORKING ON SMITH COVE
PARK FOR WHAT IT FEELS LIKE
MUCH OF OUR LIFETIME NOW.
BUT IT FEELS TO ME THAT THE
WHOLE PROJECT IS WAY MORE
EXPENSIVE THAN WHAT WE HAD
INITIALLY THOUGHT.
SO THE WEST SIDE WE HAD THE
SOCCER FIELDS AND THEN WE HAD
TO DO THE CONSTRUCTION FOR THE
OVERFLOW, OR THE PIPES THAT
WERE COMING DOWN OFF THE
HILLSIDE.
AND THEN THERE WAS SOMETHING
ELSE THAT WENT ON, AND THEN WE
WERE DIGGING IT UP AGAIN.
DO WE HAVE A SCHEDULE NOW FOR
WHEN THAT WESTSIDE WILL BE
COMPLETED?
AND ALSO, I KNOW THE
NEIGHBORHOOD HAS REALLY BEEN
INTERESTED IN THE EASTSIDE
BECAUSE THAT TOUCHES WATER ON
THE EASTSIDE, BUT ALSO
POTENTIALLY RIGHT DOWN TO THE
WATER ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF THE
PARK.
WHAT IS THE SCHEDULE ABOUT?
>> THE WEST SIDE, WE EXPECT TO
GO TO CONSTRUCTION EARLY NEXT
YEAR, 2020.
I DON'T HAVE A NOTE ON HOW LONG
THE CONSTRUCTION IS ANTICIPATED
TO TAKE, BUT WE SHOULD START
CONSTRUCTION.
THE SECOND PHASE, AS YOU SAID,
IS PROBABLY JUST AS EXPENSIVE
AS THE FIRST PHASE, BUT THAT IS
NOT BEEN COSTED OUT YET AND THE
ANTICIPATION IS TO LOOK AT IT
FOR THE SECOND ROUND.
>> WE HAVE HAD MANY DESIGNS AND
PEOPLE IN MAGNOLIA AND QUEEN
ANNE IN PARTICULAR HAVE BEEN
LOOKING AT MAKING THAT A PLACE
WHERE PEOPLE CAN LAUNCH THEIR
KAYAKS AND ALSO DO, I THINK
THERE WAS EVEN SOME VOLLEYBALL
COURTS THAT WERE GOING TO BE
INCLUDED.
BUT PRIMARILY IT WAS NOT GOING
TO BE IS ACTIVELY SCHEDULED AS
WHAT WAS HAPPENING ON THE WEST
SIDE.
I HEAR FROM COLLEAGUES,
PARTICULARLY MAGNOLIA, WE HAVE
BEEN WORKING ON THIS THING FOR
15 YEARS, HOW COME IT IS NOT
MOVING FORWARD?
SO I HOPE IN MY ABSENCE THAT
YOU WILL CONTINUE TO HAVE PEOPLE
THAT KEEP THAT ONE MOVING
FORWARD.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK IT DOES PRESENT A
UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE
WATER ACCESS AGAIN.
I THINK THAT IS THE EXCITING
PART OF IT.
BUT AS YOU SAID, IT IS NOT YET
FUNDED, AND THERE IS A LOT OF
EXCITING CONCEPTUAL DESIGNS PUT
TOGETHER, BUT THE HOPE IS TO
CONTINUE.
>> WILL WE PUT MORE FUNDING IN,
OR IS THAT THE PLAN FOR THE
PARK DISTRICT GOING FORWARD SO
WE CAN COMPLETE IT?
>> IT IS ON OUR LIST OF THE
THINGS THAT, OF THE VERY LONG
LIST OF THINGS IN TERMS OF
POTENTIALLY BEING FUNDED IN THE
SECOND OR THIRD ROUND OF THE
PARK DISTRICT.
IS DEFINITELY THERE.
>> SOMEWHERE.
>> JUST ON THE 2019 BUDGET
VERSUS ACTUALS, DID THE
TIMELINE SLIP FROM WHEN WE SET
THE BUDGET LAST YEAR
SIGNIFICANTLY?
>> IN TERMS OF THE SPEND RATE?
>> YEAH.
SPENDING ALMOST 5.$5 MILLION
AND WE ARE AT $60 MILLION TO
DATE.
>> I'M SORRY, YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT SMITH COVE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> I THINK THE DESIGN AND THE
BIDDING AND ALL OF THAT TOOK A
LITTLE LONGER THAN ANTICIPATED.
THOSE COSTS ONLY REFLECT THE
EARLY DESIGN.
I'M SURE THEY'RE STILL BILLS
DUE TO US FOR SOME OF THE FINAL
DESIGN BEFORE WE GO TO BED.
>> WHEN I LOOK ACROSS THE
BOARD, ACTUALS THROUGH
SEPTEMBER VERSUS BUDGET.
WE'RE AT 22%, SO IS THAT THEME
JUST CONSISTENT ACROSS THEM?
>> THERE ARE DIFFERENT REASONS
FOR EACH OF THESE THINGS, BUT
HOLISTICALLY, IT IS BROUGHT
THEMED THAT I AM REALLY
CONCERNED ABOUT LOOKING AT IT
FROM THE STANDPOINT OF JUST
BEING ABLE TO GET THE
INFORMATION.
FOR EXAMPLE, THIS TABLE IS
CONFUSING IN MANY WAYS.
NOT BECAUSE, ONLY BECAUSE IT IS
HARD TO PUT A LOT OF
INFORMATION.
FOR EXAMPLE, FOR 2019 THE $93
MILLION IN THE THIRD TO LAST
COLUMN INCLUDES CARRYOVER FUNDS
FROM 2015 THROUGH 2018 PLUS $28
MILLION NEW FOR 2019.
THOSE CARRYOVERS ARE HARDER
BECAUSE THERE ARE PROJECTS IN
VARIOUS STAGES.
SUMMER STILL STARTING EARLY,
SOME ALMOST DONE.
IT IS HARD TO TRACK THEM UNLESS
WE PUT TOGETHER A GIGANTIC
SPREADSHEET FOR YOU.
PLUS THE --
>> 70.
>> THE TOTAL WE SPENT IS ABOUT
50% OF EVERYTHING WE HAVE HAD
ALLOCATED.
AGAIN, EVERY PROJECT IS
DIFFERENT, SOME ARE COMPLETELY
DONE IN SUMMER DELAYED FOR
DIFFERENT REASONS.
THAT IS A NUMBER I AM WATCHING
VERY CLOSELY TO MAKE SURE WE
CONTINUE TO STAY ON TOP OF IT
AND DO BETTER WITH REPORTING,
BUT ALSO DO BETTER WITH OUR
PROJECT MANAGEMENT.
SO A COUPLE OF THINGS WE HAVE
DONE ALREADY IS WE HAVE MADE
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES WITH OUR
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
DIVISION THAT OVERSEES ALL
THESE PROJECTS TO JUST DO A
BETTER JOB OF THAT.
WE ARE ADDING A NEW PROCESS FOR
EXAMPLE, A STAGE GATING PROCESS
THAT EACH STAGE WE HAVE BETTER
INFORMATION BECAUSE OFTEN WHAT
WILL HAPPEN, BUT THE PROJECT
WILL GO THROUGH, AND WHEN IT IS
ABOUT TO GO TO BED, WE REALIZE
THE ESTIMATES ARE HIGHER THAN
THE BUDGET SO THEN THE KIDS PUT
ON HOLD AND THEN WE HAVE TO
FIGURE OUT HOW TO FUND IT.
WE WANT TO SET IT UP SO THAT
EACH STAGE WE HAVE THOSE
CONVERSATIONS EARLY AND HAVE A
BETTER SENSE OF WHAT IS
HAPPENING.
AND FRANKLY WE JUST ADDED MORE
CAPACITY.
THIS IS A GROUP THAT HAS BEEN
DELIVERING ROUGHLY $70 MILLION
WORTH OF PROJECTS EVERY YEAR.
AT LEAST ACTIVE PROJECTS.
THE LAST COUPLE OF MONTHS WE
HAVE ADDED MORE STAFF THERE.
FINALLY, WE ARE GETTING AN
OUTSIDE CONSULTANT, PAR
CONSULTING, COMING IN AND
DIGGING INTO ALL OF THESE AND
GIVING RECOMMENDATIONS, SOME OF
WHICH WERE ALREADY STARTING TO
IMPLEMENT.
BUT OUR HOPE IS THAT AS WE
CLOSE OUT THIS FIRST SIX YEAR
CYCLE, WE ARE DOING BETTER NOW
WAS SPENDING, BUT REALLY HAVE A
SOLID PLAN TO MAKE SURE WE ARE
BETTER AT MANAGING.
AND PRESENTING THE INFORMATION
IN A WAY THAT IS EASIER TO
FOLLOW FOR FOLKS TO UNDERSTAND.
>> I WILL JUST SAY THAT IT
SEEMS LIKE A SIMILAR PARALLEL
TO SOME OF THE CHALLENGES
D.O.T.
HAS HAD. ITSELF LIKE SOME OF
THE RESPONSES YOU'RE MAKING ARE
SIMILAR TO THAT, WHICH IS
GREAT.
OBVIOUSLY, AS WE MOVE TOWARDS
THIS TIME NEXT YEAR WHEN WE
WILL BE UPDATING, I THINK IT IS
GOING TO BE REALLY HELPFUL TO
HAVE AS MUCH CLARITY ABOUT
WHERE WE ARE GOING ON THAT.
YOU KNOW, WHEN A PROJECT TAKES
FOUR YEARS INSTEAD OF TWO
YEARS, THERE IS PROBABLY AT A
COST, BUT THE BIGGEST THING FOR
MY PERSPECTIVE IS THAT THE
PROJECT IS NOT AVAILABLE TO BE
USED FOR A COUPLE OF YEARS.
IF THE REALITY IS THAT WE ARE
JUST TOO AMBITIOUS IN THE
TIMELINES AND THE PROJECTS ARE
FOR YOUR PROJECTS, AND WE JUST
MISSED THAT WHEN WE FIRST PUT
IT IN, THEN THAT IS FAIR.
LET'S USE THAT WHEN WE THINK
ABOUT HOW MUCH CAPACITY WE HAVE
NEXT YEAR WITH THE CASH FLOWS
COMING IN, AND LET'S MATCH THE
STAFF TO THAT AS SOON AS WE CAN
TOO.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
BECAUSE NOT EVERY PROJECT TAKES
THE SAME AMOUNT OF TIME.
WE NEED TO BE MUCH MORE
SPECIFIC ABOUT THESE INDIVIDUAL
POJECTS.
WHICH WILL HAVE INPUT IN THE
WAY WE BUDGET.
BECAUSE RIGHT NOW THE WAY WE
BUDGET, WE BUDGET FOR EVERY
PROJECT HAVING THESE THREE
PHASES IS A PHASE 1 IS THIS
YOUR, PHASE 2 IS THIS YEAR, BUT
IF ANYTHING CHANGES BECAUSE THE
SCOPE IS DIFFERENT, THEN THE
BUDGETING IS OUT OF WHACK.
SO WE WANT TO GET BETTER AT
EACH YEAR UPDATING THE BUDGET
TO GET A BETTER SENSE OF WHAT
IS HAPPENING.
>> I THINK WE NEED TO SELL THEM
AS THE PARKS DISTRICT, BUT THE
REPORTING, I KNOW D.O.T.
HAS STRUGGLED WITH HOW TO
ACCURATELY REPORT THE CARRYOVER
MONEY FROM LAST YEAR TO THIS
YEAR.
ARE WE ON TARGET OR NOT?
DEPENDS ON HOW YOU LOOK AT THE
NUMBER.
SO NOT THE MOST IMPORTANT THING
TO WORK ON, BUT SOME WAY TO
REPORT ON THAT SO WE CAN HAVE
WAYS TO ESSENTIALLY HOLD YOU
ALL ACCOUNTABLE TO SAY I KNOW
WE STARTED OFF SLOW, BUT ARE WE
ON PACE NOW?
SOME WAY TO DELIVER THAT
INFORMATION WOULD BE HELPFUL.
>> NOT KEEPING THIS TO DEATH,
THE OTHER COMPETITION IN
ADDITION TO TIMING IS THE
DIFFERENT FUNDING SOURCES.
THAT IS WHERE THE TRANSPARENCY
PIECE GETS REALLY IMPORTANT AND
COMPLICATED.
I DO YOU THINK IT IS REALLY
IMPORTANT.
>> WILL BE GO INTO THE NEXT
PLAN, WE MAY WANT TO THINK
ABOUT BUDGETING BECAUSE REALLY
WHAT WE HAVE ON THE CAPITOL
SIDE IS THE APPROPRIATION.
IS NOT THE SPENDING PLAN, AND
JUST EXACTLY WHAT JESUS IS
SAYING, SOME ARE MULTIPLE YEARS
. THEY'RE NOT GOING TO ACTUALLY
SPEND A LOT OF THEIR BUDGET
UNTIL THEY GET TO CONSTRUCTION.
BUT THAT IS NOT WHAT YOU SEE IN
FRONT OF YOU.
YOU SEE THE APPROPRIATION.
THAT IS MUCH MORE TRUE FOR THE
OPERATING WHERE YOU GET THE
APPROPRIATION IN THAT ONE YEAR
AND SPEND ALMOST 99% OF THE
MONEY GETS SPENT IN THAT ONE
YEAR.
>> YEAH, THAT IS THE REALITY,
THEN OBVIOUSLY ALL THE
QUESTIONS ARE MOVED.
SEEMS LIKE THERE IS A MIX OF
THING.
>> I THINK THAT IS ALL WE HAD.
>> ANYTHING ELSE?
WORDS OF WISDOM?
>> NO.
THANK YOU.
>> I AM HAPPY TO ANSWER.
>> THANK YOU.
>> CHAIR, I HAVE A QUESTION.
WE HAD A PUBLIC HEARING ON
THREE RESOLUTIONS RELATED TO
THE REVENUE SOURCES FOR THE
2020 OPERATIONS BUDGET AND THE
POTENTIAL TAX LEVY INCREASE IN
2020.
ARE WE, ARE THESE PART OF
BUDGET LEGISLATION WE'RE GOING
TO VOTE ON?
>> WE WERE ACTUALLY VOTED THEM
NEXT ON MONDAY AFTER THE VOTE
ON THE ENTIRE BUDGET, THEN WE
GO INTO THE PARK DISTRICT
MEETING AND ADOPT ALL THE
RESOLUTIONS AND THEN ADOPT A
PARKS DISTRICT PORTION OF
FUNDING AND BUDGETS.
>> AND SO, I AM JUST STRUGGLING
A LITTLE BIT WITH THE FACT THAT
IT APPEARS WE'RE MAKING SOME
COMMITMENTS FOR 2020, BOTH ON
THE OPERATING AND CAPITOL SIDE.
AND WE DID NOT HEAR VERY MUCH
FROM THE PUBLIC TODAY ON THAT.
COULD YOU MAYBE TALK A LITTLE
BIT MORE ABOUT THE PUBLIC
PROCESS THAT PARKS HAS DONE
THAT IS LED TO THESE
RECOMMENDATIONS AND THESE THREE
RESOLUTIONS?
>> WE HAVE NOT HAD A PUBLIC
HEARING YET.
I THINK THERE ARE SOME PEOPLE
SIGNED UP.
>> SORRY.
>> BUT WE ARE GOING TO HAVE IT
TODAY.
>> AND THESE FINE FOLKS WILL BE
TALKING TO US.
I'M JUST WONDERING.
HAS IT BEEN OTHER PUBLIC
PROCESS?
>> IN TERMS OF, AND I
APOLOGIZE, I'M NOT SURE.
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
RESOLUTIONS, THE LEVY RATE AS
PART OF THE BROADER? GOT IT.
I THINK IN TERMS OF OUR
ENGAGEMENT, SO CERTAINLY
THERE'LL BE THIS HEARING.
WE HAVE REGULAR PARK DISTRICT
AND OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE
MEETINGS AND PARK BOARD
MEETINGS AND TALK A LOT ABOUT
THESE ISSUES.
AND THEN CERTAINLY THROUGH OUR
ENGAGEMENT PROCESS THAT WE JUST
COMPLETED, WASN'T SPECIFIC TO
2020, BUT REALLY ABOUT WHAT ARE
THE PRIORITIES AND THE THINGS
THE COMMUNITY CARES ABOUT.
THOSE ARE CERTAINLY INFORMING
WHAT WE ARE GOING TO DO FOR
2020 AND BEYOND.
BUT IN TERMS OF THE CURRENT
BUDGET, WE DIDN'T DO ANYTHING
SIGNIFICANT OR ANYTHING
SPECIFIC.
>> THANK YOU.
>> ANYONE ELSE?
OKAY.
ARE WE DONE?
THANK YOU.
THAT WILL AND THE PRESENTATION.
SO WITH THAT, COUNCILMEMBER
HERBOLD, YOU ARE CORRECT, WERE
GOING TO GO TO PUBLIC HEARING.
IN REGARDS TO, WE PUT OUT A
NOTICE FOR TODAY STARTING AT
2:30 PM.
SO WE WILL NOW OPEN THE PUBLIC
HEARING TO ACCEPT COMMENTS ON
THE BUDGET OF POTENTIAL
PROPERTY TAX LEVY INCREASE FOR
2019.
HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE SIGNED UP?
>> WE HAVE TWO PEOPLE SIGNED UP
FOR THE HEARING.
>> YOU CAN STILL SIGN UP.
SO WE HAVE THREE PEOPLE NOW.
FOUR.
YOU WANT TO CALL THE FIRST TWO
FOR ME?
>> THE FIRST SPEAKERS ARE TIM
MOSER AND PAT GRIFFITH.
>> MY NAME IS TIM MOSER, LAKE
CITY NEIGHBORHOOD ALLIANCE, 25
ORGANIZATIONS.
I'M HERE AT YOUR PUBLIC HEARING
TO SUPPORT THE PARK DISTRICT
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE
RECOMMENDATION PROVIDED AT YOUR
JUNE 24 MEETING TO REPAYING THE
CURRENT 2019 PARK DISTRICT
PROPERTY TAX OF $.22 THROUGH
2020.
I AM A LITTLE DISAPPOINTED
GIVEN YOUR COMMENT,
COUNCILWOMAN HERBOLD, ABOUT TO
SEE RESOLUTION 32 AS THAT
PEGGED AT $.21.
SO I GUESS MY QUESTION IS,
WHERE IS THE CONSIDERATION OF
YOUR OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE ON
THAT ISSUE?
AFTER REVIEWING RESOLUTION 30,
WHICH INCLUDES THE PARK
DISTRICT BUDGET, I HAVE A
NUMBER OF QUESTIONS RELATED TO
SEVERAL LINE ITEMS, SOME
QUESTIONS HAVE BEEN ANSWERED.
THE FIRST ONE IS TO RESTORE
COMMUNITY CENTER OPS AS ALL THE
$1.4 MILLION THAT WAS
ORIGINALLY CUT FROM THIS LINE
ITEM THEN RESTORED SINCE YOUR
2018 BUDGET ACTION ONLY
RESTORED $850,000 OF THOSE
FUNDS.
SO THAT IS THE QUESTION.
TWO I AM AWARE THAT THE
COMMUNITY LINE ITEM WAS
INCREASED SUBSTANTIALLY IN
2019.
IT WAS AT ONE POINT I MILLION
DOLLARS INCREASE TO FUND THE
COMMUNITY CENTER POSITIONS AT
TRENT ARC WAS NO LONGER WILLING
TO FUND.
SECOND AREA, COMMUNITY CENTER
WE HAVE DEVELOPMENT.
GIVEN THE SUBSTANTIAL REDUCTION
IN LIGHT ITEMS STARTING IN 2019
AND 2020 OF $320,000, HOW MUCH
OF THAT BUDGET WAS ACTUALLY
SPENT?
I THINK THE ANSWER TO THAT
QUESTION WAS $2.5 MILLION.
DID ANY OF THE SIX IDENTIFIED
COMMUNITY CENTERS GET PLAITED?
I DID NOT HEAR THE ANY OF THEM
DID.
IT SOUNDS LIKE THEY ARE STILL
ALL IN PROGRESS.
AND WHAT KIND OF FINANCIAL
OBLIGATION AGAINST THE NEXT SIX
YEAR FUNDING CYCLE WILL BE
CREATED TO FINISH THOSE SIX
COMMUNITY CENTERS THAT WERE NOT
COMPLETED?
I WOULD LIKE TO REITERATE A
RECOMMENDATION I MADE YOU IN
THE PAST SEVERAL YEARS, AND
THAT IS TO REVISE THE PARK
DISTRICT RESOLUTION TO ALLOW
FOR MIDYEAR CORRECTIONS THAT
WOULD ALLOW FOR INCREASES AND
SPENDING PLAN IF NEEDED.
THIS POSSIBILITY IS NEEDED TO
ALLOW CHANGES TO THE SPENDING
PLAN TO REFLECT MAJOR CHANGES
THAT OCCUR THAT ARE NOT
ANTICIPATED.
IN THE LAST SIX YEARS WE HAVE
SEEN SOME HUGE CHANGES,
ESPECIALLY IN THE GROWTH OF THE
CITY.
SO I WANT TO THANK THE CITY
COUNCIL FOR CONSIDERATION OF
THESE RECOMMENDATIONS AND
QUESTIONS AS PART OF YOUR 2020
PARK DISTRICT DELIBERATIONS.
THANK YOU.
>> WE SHOULD ALSO NOTE THAT WE
MET WITH THE PARK DISTRICT
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE, MISS
McCAFFREY AND FOLKS, AND ALSO
RECEIVED A LETTER FROM THEM
OUTLINING THE ISSUES THAT YOU
HAVE BROUGHT UP.
I JUST WANT YOU TO KNOW WE HAVE
THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
>> MY NAME IS PAT GRIFFITH.
MY ORIGINAL COMMENTS AND THE
REASON I CAME WERE MADE BY MR.
HARRIS.
AND MR. HARPER.
BUT MY QUESTION IS, WE HAVEN'T
RECEIVED ANY INFORMATION ON A
TAX INCREASE.
AND YOU INTEND TO VOTE ON IT
NEXT WEEK?
THAT DOES NOT SEEM QUITE KOSHER.
AND I AM WONDERING WHY AN
INCREASE IS NECESSARY IF WE
HAVE SUCH AN UNDER SPEND?
THANK YOU.
>> CAROL BURTON.
I WHERE A NUMBER OF HATS.
I AM A MEMBER OF THE FRIENDS OF
SMITH COVE PARK THAT OF THE
WORKING I THINK HALF MY
LIFETIME ON SMITH COVE.
YOU HAVE BEEN THERE TOO.
AND WE REALLY LIKE TO SEE IT
DONE.
IT IS BEEN PUT OFF AND PUT OFF
AND PEOPLE ARE VERY
DISAPPOINTED.
VERY DISAPPOINTED THAT YOU
CHANGED THE WHOLE COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT PLAN BECAUSE YOU
HAVE THIS HIGH-POWERED
INTERNATIONAL COMPANY, G GN,
THAT HAVE NEVER DONE PUBLIC
MEETINGS AND STUFF LIKE THAT.
I ALSO WANT TO ECHO.
I AM WITH GREEN SEATTLE
PARTNERSHIP TOO, I WAS ONE OF
THE ORIGINAL FOUR STEWARDS.
I JUST RECENTLY FOUND OUT THAT
GREEN SEATTLE PARTNERSHIP
BUDGET WAS CUT IN THIS LAST
YEAR.
THAT WAS KEPT PRETTY QUIET.
WE DO A LOT OF WORK.
WITHOUT ALL THE VOLUNTEER
HOURS, YOUR PARKS, YOUR FOREST
AND PARKS, WOULD BE IN REALLY
BAD SHAPE.
THIRD THING I WOULD LIKE TO SAY
IS ECHO WITH PAT SAID.
THE REASON WE DON'T HAVE
ANYBODY HERE IS BECAUSE NOBODY
KNOWS ABOUT IT.
I MEAN, YOU GET THE NOTICE, BUT
THERE WERE NO ATTACHING
DOCUMENTS TO THIS AGENDA.
THERE WAS FINALLY A LINK PUT ON
THE PARK DISTRICT PAGE, AND
THEN YOU HAD TO GO THROUGH FIVE
OR SIX PAGES TO FIND SOME
ACTUAL NUMBERS.
WHY COULDN'T YOU PUT A LINK ON
THE AGENDA, WHICH IS TYPICAL?
I HAVE NEVER SEEN A COUNCIL A
GENTLE AGENDA WITHOUT A LINK TO
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS.
AND PEOPLE ARE SAYING, WHAT IS
HAPPENING?
IT IS LIKE, I DON'T KNOW.
IT DOESN'T SAY.
THEY'RE GOING TO VOTE NEXT WEEK
ON A BUDGET, BUT THEY WILL NOT
TELL US WHAT THE BUDGET IS.
SO YOU NEED TO THINK ABOUT THAT
IF YOU WANT TO INCLUDE THE
PUBLIC.
I KNOW YOU CAN DO THE TAX
INCREASE WITHOUT A VOTE, BUT
PEOPLE AT LEAST NEED TO KNOW.
TIM SAYING THE $.21 IS THE
FIRST TIME I HAVE HEARD.
I KNOW HE FOLLOWS IT MORE THAN
I DO, BUT I FOLLOW A LOT OF
YOUR STUFF.
SO THINK ABOUT THAT.
IF YOU WANT THE COMMUNITY, WE
DON'T ALL HAVE TIME TO GO TO
THE OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE OR THE
PARKS COMMISSIONERS AND THAT
KIND OF THING.
>> LET ME CLEAR SOMETHING UP.
WE HAVE A LITTLE BIT OF
CONFUSION ABOUT WHEN WE POSTED
THE NOTICE.
>> THE ATTACHMENTS AND
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS, MY
UNDERSTANDING IS THAT THEY WERE
ALL HERE.
AND THE TAXES.
>> NOT ON MY PHONE WITH MY
EMAIL.
>> I DON'T WANT TO GET IN AN
ARGUMENT.
I WILL MEET WITH YOU AFTERWARDS
IF YOU WOULD LIKE.
>> THEY SHOULD'VE BEEN LIVE ON
FRIDAY.
I THINK WE GOT ALL THE
MATERIALS TO THE CLERKS BY
FRIDAY.
SO THEY SHOULD BE ABLE TO FIND
THEM BY GOING TO THE COUNCIL
WEBPAGE THAT TAKES INTO THE
PARK DISTRICT BECAUSE WE TRIED
TO DO A COMBINED WEBSITE.
THEY SHOULD'VE HAD ALL THE
LINKS FOR ALL THE DOCUMENTS.
>> TODAY IS MONDAY.
>> WHAT WE WILL DO IS, WE'VE
ANSWERED THAT, AND I WILL
FOLLOW-UP WITH YOU IN A MINUTE
CAROL.
WHO IS NEXT?
>> SUSAN KATHY -- CASEY.
>> BEFORE I START MY REMARKS, I
WANT TO SAY IT IS VERY
DIFFICULT FOR THOSE IN THE
AUDIENCE TO UNDERSTAND WHAT YOU
ARE SAYING.
IF YOU TURN AWAY FROM YOUR
MICROPHONE, WE CAN'T HEAR YOU.
SO WE'RE STRUGGLING TO HEAR
WHAT YOU'RE SAYING.
MANY OF THE POINTS I WAS GOING
TO MAKE OF ALREADY BEEN MADE BY
CAROL AND DON AND SO ON.
BUT I AM VERY CONCERNED THAT WE
HAVE NOT REALLY HAD EASY ACCESS
TO THE 2020 PROPOSED BUDGET.
I'M ALSO CONCERNED THAT YOU
HAVE ONLY MET, YOU ARE ONLY
MEETING TWICE A YEAR AS A BOARD
OF COMMISSIONERS TO OVERSEE
PARKS WORK.
I THINK THAT IS -- THE OTHER
THING, BECAUSE I DON'T HAVE A
COPY, AND I WAS ABLE TO STUDY
THE BUDGET, IS THAT I AM VERY
CONCERNED ABOUT TWO THINGS.
THE LACK OF APPARENT INTEREST
IN REALLY HAVING NEIGHBORHOOD
PARKS.
MY DAUGHTER LIVES IN MONTRCAL
AND IT IS A DANCE -- DENSE
CITY, AND THEY HAVE
NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS FILLED WITH
PEOPLE USING THEM.
EVERY FOUR OR FIVE BLOCKS.
IT'S AMAZING.
WE NEED MORE OF THAT HERE.
THE OTHER THING IS, IT SEEMS TO
TAKE SO LONG TO DO THINGS, AND
WE ARE ALWAYS CONSTANTLY
STUDYING AND SOMEONE.
LET'S BE MORE REALISTIC ABOUT
WHAT IS BEING DONE AND MAYBE
PERHAPS THE COUNCIL OR THE NEW
COUNCIL SHOULD LOOK AT MORE
PERFORMANCE OF THE AUDITS.
THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
>> MR. HINES.
STATE YOUR NAME AND WHAT ITEM
YOU'RE SPEAKING TO.
>> DAVID HINES ABOUT THE PARK.
I FINALLY FIND IT HIGHLY
SUSPECT THAT MOTHER NATURE SEE
NEED SO MUCH MONEY TO PRESERVE
PARKS AND CREATE PARKS WITHOUT
CONCRETE.
OR FOR LIKE EMPLOYEES TO MOVE
INTO A BUILDING WHILE PARKS AND
REC HAS THIS HUGE TRASH TRUCK
USED TO THROW STUFF AWAY WITH
THE COPS YELLING AT THE
HOMELESS DO YOU WANT SERVICE.
WHY DOESN'T THE PARKS AND REC
TRASH TRUCK GET USED TO PICK UP
ALL THE GOVERNMENT AND
NONGOVERNMENT PARTNERS TO TRY
TO SOLVE THE HOMELESS CRISIS
TRASH, TINY HOME VILLAGES AND
OTHER HOMELESS NONPROFITS,
GETTING SHAKEN DOWN BY WALL
STREET OWED TRASH AND PORTA
POTTY SERVICE.
NEEDS TO BE INVESTIGATED
BECAUSE WE NEED THE SAME
BATHROOM, SHOWER, LAUNDRY AS
THE MARINA THAT THE GOVERNMENT
BUILT FOR A BUNCH OF DRAWS A
WANNABE YACHT FOLKS WHO COME
INTO THIS COUNTRY WHENEVER THEY
FEEL LIKE IT.
AND THEY GET THE MOST TOP SHELF
LAUNDRY SHOWER AND YOU KNOW,
LIKE, THE HYGIENE NEEDS. AND
THE GOVERNMENT BUILT THE WHOLE
THING FOR THEM.
AND WE DON'T HAVE THAT FOR THE
HOMELESS, BUT YOU'RE USING THE
PARKS AND REC BUDGET TO CONDUCT
A WAR ON THE HOMELESS WILL NOT
EVEN HAVING THE PROPER, LIKE
SCOTT MOREAU, WITH THE COPS
THING I HAVE A VAN TAKING YOU
TO THE HOMELESS ENCAMPMENT NOW
. HE IS NOWHERE TO EVER BE
FOUND.
HE SENDS IN HIS LITTLE MINIONS
THAT PAY.
BUT YOU CANNOT USE THE PARKS
AND REC, WHICH IS LIKE THE MOST
EXPENSIVE, TO FINANCE MARTIN
SELIG AND ALL THE SHADY
BUILDINGS AND ALL THIS PEOPLE
DON'T GET THEIR HANDS DIRTY
BUTTER REALLY DIRTY IN THE
GOVERNMENT WHO ARE RUNNING THE
PARKS AND REC WERE ALLOWING IT
TO BE USED TO CONDUCT A WAR.
AND I DARESAY IT IS MOSTLY THE
GATE PEOPLE IN THE GOVERNMENT
CONDUCTING A WAR ON INNOCENT
POOR PEOPLE AND HAVING A GOOD
OLD TIME WITH JUDGING PEOPLE
HARSHLY.
ACTED LIKE THEY COULD FINALLY
FIND SOMEBODY THEY CAN KICK
THEM.
AND THE COPS ARE ALLOWING A
WHOLE BUNCH OF PREDATORY
LOWLIFE SATURATING DRUG PUSHERS
WERE DESTROYING PEOPLES LIVES.
AND YOU ARE USING THESE PEOPLE
AS WRAPAROUND WERE PROFITABLE
SERVICES WHILE INNOCENT ARE
STILL BEING FORSAKEN BECAUSE
YOU GUYS HAVE NUMBER TO GO
EXCEPT THE JAIL.
>> THANK YOU.
OKAY.
TRYING TO SEE IF WE CAN SPEAK
TO HER FRIENDS.
I THINK PEOPLE ARE GETTING
CONFUSED THE PARKS WAS DOING A
PRESENTATION WHICH IS SEPARATE
THAN THE METROPOLITAN PARK
DISTRICT AND WHAT WE ARE GOING
TO VOTE ON NEXT WEEK.
AND WHEN WE ARE REQUIRED TO BE,
WHICH IS TWICE A YEAR.
IS THAT CORRECT?
THAT IS WHAT IS REQUIRED OF US.
BUT WE CAN GET OFF-LINE AND
EXPLAIN THAT PROCESS.
>> COUPLE COMMENTS.
FOR CIVIL, JUST A PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND, WE ARE GOING TO BE
COLLECTING MORE IN TERMS OF THE
REVENUE FOR THE PARK DISTRICT
NEXT YEAR.
$53 MILLION VERSUS ABOUT 52
THIS YEAR.
THE ESTIMATED ASSESSED VALUE IS
ACTUALLY GOING TO BE $.21 PER
THOUSAND DOLLARS, WHICH IS ONE
CENT LESS THAN WHAT WE
COLLECTED LAST YEAR.
LAST YEAR, $.22. THAT IS
BECAUSE THE AV HAS GONE UP AND
WE'RE ABLE TO REDUCE THAT.
IN CASE PEOPLE THINK I'M GOING
TO SEE THIS BIG INCREASE IN MY
TAXES FOR THIS PARTICULAR PIECE
OF THE LEVY, PARKS LEVY, THAT
SHOULD NOT BE THE CASE.
>> ROUGHLY 51 TO 53 MILLION,
THE INCREASE SHIFT, DOES NOT
INCLUDE NEW CONSTRUCTION?
>> I THINK PART OF THAT
CHALLENGE TOO IS THAT WHEN THE
FIRST SIX-YEAR PARK DISTRICT
BUDGET WAS ADOPTED, IT WAS SET
AT A DOLLAR AMOUNT PER YEAR
WITH AN INFLATIONARY CAUSE.
THAT WAS ALL THE PROJECTS AND
THEIR.
IT DOES INCLUDE NEW
CONSTRUCTION, BUT THAT IS BEEN
SET SINCE IT WOULD IS ADOPTED
IN 2014 OR 2050.
THE REASON THE CHANGES IS
BECAUSE, ALTHOUGH THAT NUMBER
STAYS, THE BUDGET NUMBER STAYS
THE SAME, AS THE PROPERTY
VALUES GO UP, THE RATE CHANGES.
THE RATE WILL CHANGE, BUT OUR
BUDGET THAT IS BEEN APPROVED
ISN'T CHANGING . IT IS THE SAME
AMOUNT OF MONEY WE SAID WE
WOULD GET SIX YEARS AGO.
>> THERE ARE CLEARLY A NUMBER
OF WAYS FOLKS COULD CHOOSE TO
MEASURE WHAT WE ARE DOING WHEN
YOU ARE OVER THE NEXT. I THINK
PROBABLY THE MOST REAL WAY
WOULD BE FOR AN INDIVIDUAL TO
LOOK AT THEIR BILL AND SEE WHAT
THEY PAID THIS YEAR AND WHAT
THEY ARE PAYING NEXT YEAR.
AND THAT WILL FLUCTUATE BY A
NUMBER THINGS.
WHAT IS YOUR ASSESSED VALUE
CHANGES RELATIVE TO EVERYONE
ELSE'S IN THE CITY.
OUR RATE IS ACTUALLY GOING DOWN
FROM $.22 TO $.21.
THE TOTAL AMOUNT WE ARE
COLLECTING IS GOING UP
SLIGHTLY, A COUPLE OF
PERCENTAGE POINTS.
THAT ALSO REFLECTS THE FACT
THERE IS A LOT MORE VALUED IN
THE CITY TO COLLECT FROM.
DOESN'T NECESSARILY IMPLY AN
INDIVIDUAL WILL PAY.
BUT IF YOU'VE DONE A MAJOR
REMODEL THAT IS BEEN CAPTURED,
IT WOULD IMPROVE IT IF YOUR
PROPERTY VALUE IS GOING UP A
LOT HIGHER THAN YOUR NEIGHBORS
BECAUSE MAYBE IT IS OWNED A
CERTAIN WAY.
BUT PEOPLE ON THE OTHER SIDE
WILL SEE A LOWER PAYMENT NEXT
YEAR TOO.
OF THAT WILL VARY BY
INDIVIDUALS.
>> I SHOULD ADD BECAUSE THAT IS
WHAT WE ARE GOING TO LOOK AT
AND HAVE ROBUST ACTIVITY ABOUT
THE SIX-YEAR PLAN.
WE HAVE THIS NEXT YEAR TO
FINISH OUT, AND THEN WE PUT
TOGETHER A PLAN FOR THE NEXT
SIX YEARS, BUT WE'RE TRYING TO
DO IS BE TRUE TO WHAT THE
VOTERS ASK FOR IN 2014 ABOUT,
WE ALL VOTED FOR PARKS, CREATED
A METROPOLITAN PARK DISTRICT.
THAT IS WHERE THE CONFUSION IS.
PEOPLE CONFUSE THAT WITH THE
ACTUAL PARKS COMMITTEE, WHICH
IS SEPARATE.
THOUGH INTEGRATED AND WE TALK
TO EACH OTHER.
SO IT ISN'T THAT IT HASN'T
GOTTEN A NOTICE, WHEN DO WE
ANTICIPATE OUR SIX-YEAR PLAN
COMING OUT?
>> 21 AND BEYOND.
THAT IS THE WORK OF NEXT YEAR.
IT WILL BE PART OF THE NEXT
YEAR BUDGET THAT WILL INCLUDE
THE SIX-YEAR FINANCIAL PLAN.
>> AND WE WILL BE HAVING A
DISCUSSION ABOUT THE SIX-YEAR
PLAN AND COMMITTEE WHERE PEOPLE
CAN COME AND GIVE PUBLIC
COMMENT.
IT WILL BE POSTED JUST LIKE
WE'VE BEEN DOING FOR THE LAST
FOUR YEARS.
I JUST WANT PEOPLE TO BE CLEAR
ABOUT THAT.
ANYTHING ELSE?
>> SO THE METROPOLITAN PARK
DISTRICT BOARD WILL STAND
ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU.